ME 7751 Project 2 Final Report
ME7751
Spring 2026, Columbus, OH

ME7751-2026-02
DESIGN AND ANALYSIS OF A PLANAR COMPLIANT MECHANISM USING PSEUDO-RIGID-BODY MODELING AND
FEA VALIDATION
Student Name 1
1

The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH

geometry, material assumptions, and support conditions are chosen to represent a typical planar compliant flexure.

ABSTRACT

This report documents the analytical modeling, finite element validation, and interactive computational demonstration
of a planar compliant mechanism. A pseudo-rigid-body (PRB)
model is derived to represent the flexural element, and finite element analysis (FEA) is used to establish baseline performance for
kinematic and torque-displacement behavior. The analytical and
numerical results are compared systematically, and the source of
remaining discrepancies is discussed. The project also includes
an interactive application that allows users to modify key design
and loading parameters while visualizing both PRB predictions
and FEA results.

FIGURE 1: FEA model, boundary conditions, and load path used
for validation.

Keywords: compliant mechanism, pseudo-rigid-body model, fi-

Key assumptions are:

nite element validation, interactive app, ASME paper format

• Linear elastic material behavior with a uniform Young’s
modulus and Poisson’s ratio.

1. INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION

Compliant mechanisms leverage elastic deformation to
achieve motion without traditional kinematic joints, enabling
compact, low-friction, and monolithic designs. This project focuses on the design and analysis of a planar compliant mechanism
because such devices are widely used in precision positioning,
soft robotic actuation, and microelectromechanical systems. The
goal is to connect reduced-order analytical modeling via pseudorigid-body theory with finite element validation and a computational app that highlights differences between the two modeling
regimes.

• Planar deformation dominated by bending and axial compliance in the flexural members.
• A single input torque applied at the crank and a single
output displacement measured at the slider interface.
• Negligible friction and no discrete pin joints in the compliant segments.
3. ANALYTICAL MODELING METHODOLOGY

The analytical model uses the pseudo-rigid-body method,
which replaces compliant beam segments with equivalent rigid
links connected by torsional springs. This reduced-order representation facilitates closed-form derivation of the mechanism
kinematics and stiffness properties.
The PRB model begins by identifying the flexural segment
length, effective pivot location, and characteristic stiffness. For a
planar flexure with length 𝐿, thickness 𝑡, and material modulus
𝐸, the bending stiffness is approximated as

2. MECHANISM DESCRIPTION AND PROBLEM DEFINITION

The selected mechanism consists of a planar flexural linkage with a compliant segment acting as a pseudo-rigid-body
element. The model applies to mechanisms that convert input
torque into an amplified slider displacement, as is common in
force/displacement amplifiers and precision positioning applications.
Figure 2 shows the beam tip deflection analysis from the
Howell and Midha paper, and the loaded configuration used for validation. The mechanism

𝑘𝜃 =

Draft version prepared for ME 7751 Project 2, Spring 2026.

1

𝐸𝐼
𝐿𝑒

(1)

Copyright ©2026 by ASME

where 𝐼 is the second moment of area and 𝐿 𝑒 is the effective
length of the equivalent torsional spring. The pseudo-rigid-body
model then relates the input torque 𝑀𝑖𝑛 to the rotation angle 𝜃 of
the flexure and the resulting slider displacement 𝑥.
The kinematic relationship is derived by considering the rigid
link geometry and the flexure rotation,
𝑥(𝜃) = 𝐿 𝑟 (1 − cos 𝜃) + 𝐿 𝑠 sin 𝜃,

(2)

where 𝐿 𝑟 is the effective link length and 𝐿 𝑠 is the slider coupling
distance.
The analytical torque-displacement relationship can be expressed as
𝑀𝑖𝑛 (𝜃) = 𝑘 𝜃 𝜃 + 𝐹𝑜𝑢𝑡 (𝜃) 𝑑 (𝜃),
(3)
FIGURE 2: Input torque versus crank angle for the analytical PRB
model and FEA validation.

where 𝐹𝑜𝑢𝑡 is the output force transmitted through the mechanism
and 𝑑 (𝜃) is the instantaneous moment arm. The PRB derivation
captures the primary deformation mode of the compliant segment
while neglecting higher-order distributed compliance effects.
4. FEA METHODOLOGY

Finite element analysis provides the ground-truth comparison for the analytical model. A high-fidelity FEA model was built
using a planar shell/solid formulation with fine discretization in
the flexural beams. The FEA model includes:
• Material elasticity consistent with the analytical assumptions.
• Support boundary conditions that fix the base and constrain
the slider path.
FIGURE 3: Normalized slider displacement versus crank angle for
the PRB model and FEA results.

• An imposed input torque or equivalent load on the crank.
• Output displacement extraction along the slider direction.
The FEA results include displacement fields, reaction forces,
and torque-displacement data for comparison to the PRB model.
5. RESULTS AND COMPARISON

The analytical PRB model predictions were compared with
FEA results over the operating range of the mechanism. Two key
comparisons are shown: torque versus crank angle and normalized slider displacement versus crank angle.
Figure 3 compares the input torque needed to drive the crank
with the analytical PRB predictions and the FEA benchmark.
Figure 4 shows the normalized slider displacement as a function of crank angle for both the analytical and FEA models.
A quantitative comparison of the analytical and numerical
performance highlights the primary discrepancy in stiffness and the difference in predicted
output displacement across the operating range.
The FEA results show slightly higher effective stiffness in
the mechanism than the PRB model predicts, consistent with
the analytical model neglecting distributed compliance and some
geometric stiffening effects. The analytic model remains accurate
for moderate deflections but begins to deviate as the compliant
element enters a larger deformation regime.

FIGURE 4: Comparison of analytical and FEA performance metrics
for the compliant mechanism.

2

Copyright ©2026 by ASME

6. INTERACTIVE APP DESCRIPTION

9. REFERENCES

1. G. P. L. Wong and S. S. Lee, "Pseudo-Rigid-Body Models
The project includes an interactive application that demonfor Compliant
Mechanism Design," Journal
of Mechanical
begin="ïż£"
id="W5M0MpCehiHzreSzNTczkc9d"?>̇<x:xmpmeta
xmlns:x="adobe:ns:meta/">̇
<rdf:RDF
xmlns:rdf="http:
strates thė<?xpacket
relationship
between analytical
model predictions and
Design,
vol.
134,
no.
8,
2012.
FEA validation. The app allows users to modify design parameters such as flexure length, material stiffness, and input torque. It
2. K. J. Bathe, Finite Element Procedures, 2nd ed., Prentice
also displays:
Hall, 1996.
• PRB analytical predictions for displacement and torque.

3. American Society of Mechanical Engineers, "ASME Conference Paper Template and Author Guidelines," 2026.

• FEA-based results or surrogate data drawn from FEA validation.
• A visual discrepancy measure between analytical and numerical models.
The application is implemented using MATLAB and a
small graphical user interface script. The main code file is
run_prb_fea_app.m, and the web-style interface code is available in script.js in the App/ folder. This interactive demonstration helps clarify how reduced-order assumptions impact mechanism response in real time.
7. DISCUSSION

The main sources of discrepancy between the PRB model
and FEA results are:
• Distributed compliance along the flexural beam rather than
a single torsional spring.
• Geometric nonlinearities arising at larger crank angles.
• Differences in the effective moment arm due to actual deformation shape versus the idealized PRB geometry.
• Finite element mesh resolution and boundary condition
idealization.
The analytical PRB model captures the dominant mechanism
behavior, making it useful for early-stage design and rapid performance estimates. However, FEA is required for higher-fidelity
validation and for quantifying the effects of non-uniform stress
distributions and local curvature.
8. CONCLUSIONS

A planar compliant mechanism was analyzed using a pseudorigid-body model and validated against finite element analysis.
The overall trends in torque and slider displacement were successfully captured by the analytical model, but FEA revealed
additional stiffness and nonlinearity not included in the reducedorder formulation. The interactive app complements the report
by enabling parameter studies and comparison of analytical and
numerical predictions. For future work, the analytical model
can be improved by incorporating distributed compliance effects,
nonlinear beam theory, and a more detailed representation of the
flexural element geometry.

3

Copyright ©2026 by ASME

